README.md, before:

# authentic-rb

Ruby clone of [@authentic/authentic](https://github.com/articulate/authentic). A simple library to validate JWTs against JWKs.

## Installation

``` bash
gem install authentic-rb
```

... or with [Bundler](https://bundler.io/man/bundle-add.1.html):

```bash
bundle add authentic-rb
```

## Usage

Instantiate `Authentic::Validator` with an options hash, which must contain an `iss_whitelist` array listing the `token.payload.iss` values you will accept. For example:

| Provider | Sample `iss_whitelist` |
| -------- | ------------------- |
| [Auth0](https://auth0.com/) | `[ 'https://${tenant}.auth0.com/' ]` |
| [Okta](https://www.okta.com/) | `[ 'https://${tenant}.oktapreview.com/oauth2/${authServerId}' ]` |

There are two basic entry points for validation. `ensure_valid` and `valid`. `valid` basically wraps `ensure_valid`, catches any errors it raises, and returns a simple boolean for those that prefer that idiom. Here are some examples of both:

***Note**: JWKs are cached in memory at the instance level. Instantiating a new instance of `Authentic::Validator` will result in a cold cache, resulting in two HTTP requests to get OIDC config then subsequently the issuer's JWKs. Generally it is best to instantiate this at the Application level thus making use of the JWK cache.*

```ruby
require 'authentic'

# Ensure you pass along your ISS whitelist when instantiating the validator
opts = { iss_whitelist: ['https://articulate.auth0.com/'] }
validator = Authentic::Validator.new(opts)

# Simply returns true or false based on validity
valid = validator.valid?(request.cookies[:token])

# Raises errors when it cannot validate a given token.
begin
    # returns the decoded JWT
    jwt = validator.ensure_valid(request.cookies[:token])
rescue InvalidToken, InvalidKey, RequestError, ExpiredToken, InvalidIssuer
    # do stuff
end
```

## Options

Instantiate `Authentic::Validator` with an options hash, which must contain an `iss_whitelist` array listing the `token.payload.iss` values you will accept. For example:

| Name            | Default | Required | Notes                                                        |
| --------------- | ------- | -------- | -------------------------------------------------------------|
| iss_whitelist   | N/A     | y        |                                                              |
| cache_max_age   | `'10h'` | n        | Supports seconds, minutes, and hours. Example `'10h 30m 60s'`|

Commit message:

Better docs on status codes

README.md, after:

# authentic-rb

Ruby clone of [@authentic/authentic](https://github.com/articulate/authentic). A simple library to validate JWTs against JWKs.

## Installation

``` bash
gem install authentic-rb
```

... or with [Bundler](https://bundler.io/man/bundle-add.1.html):

```bash
bundle add authentic-rb
```

## Usage

Instantiate `Authentic::Validator` with an options hash, which must contain an `iss_whitelist` array listing the `token.payload.iss` values you will accept. For example:

| Provider | Sample `iss_whitelist` |
| -------- | ------------------- |
| [Auth0](https://auth0.com/) | `[ 'https://${tenant}.auth0.com/' ]` |
| [Okta](https://www.okta.com/) | `[ 'https://${tenant}.oktapreview.com/oauth2/${authServerId}' ]` |

There are two basic entry points for validation. `ensure_valid` and `valid`. `valid` basically wraps `ensure_valid`, catches any errors it raises, and returns a simple boolean for those that prefer that idiom. Here are some examples of both:

***Note**: JWKs are cached in memory at the instance level. Instantiating a new instance of `Authentic::Validator` will result in a cold cache, resulting in two HTTP requests to get OIDC config then subsequently the issuer's JWKs. Generally it is best to instantiate this at the Application level thus making use of the JWK cache.*

```ruby
require 'authentic'

# Ensure you pass along your ISS whitelist when instantiating the validator
opts = { iss_whitelist: ['https://articulate.auth0.com/'] }
validator = Authentic::Validator.new(opts)

# Simply returns true or false based on validity
valid = validator.valid?(request.cookies[:token])

# Raises errors when it cannot validate a given token.
begin
    # returns the decoded JWT
    jwt = validator.ensure_valid(request.cookies[:token])
rescue InvalidToken, InvalidKey, RequestError, ExpiredToken, InvalidIssuer
    # do stuff
end
```

# Response Status Codes

According to the OAuth spec invalid or expired tokens should produce a 401 response and insufficient access (either via scope or aud/iss claim) should produce a 403. This means that all errors except `InvalidIssuer` should produce a 401 status code, and an invalid issuer should produce a 403.

## Options

Instantiate `Authentic::Validator` with an options hash, which must contain an `iss_whitelist` array listing the `token.payload.iss` values you will accept. For example:

| Name            | Default | Required | Notes                                                        |
| --------------- | ------- | -------- | -------------------------------------------------------------|
| iss_whitelist   | N/A     | y        |                                                              |
| cache_max_age   | `'10h'` | n        | Supports seconds, minutes, and hours. Example `'10h 30m 60s'`|
